Fed has in the last five years had a
couple of periods where it went out on
the limb and made predictions. Uh
transitory was an example and I think
they got somewhat burned by it.
>> Hi Miriam.
>> Hi Telus.
>> Well it's going to be a big conversation
because this week we've got a few topics
to cover. We're going to talk about Wall
Street deal making, some potential
changes to the mortgage market, but
we've also got well, we've got tariffs
back on the brain. I know when we were
doing this show a year ago, we were
talking all tariffs all the time, and it
feels a little bit like like Groundhog
Day. I don't know what's the what's the
song from that movie, AIPA Got You,
Babe. Uh I think we're experiencing some
of that in the markets today. Tariffs
are certainly once again the topic.
Dour. Uh and this week we're actually
going to talk through uh all of our
topics and all the big news in the
markets with our guest. Uh listeners of
this show might remember from last year.
He came he joined us to talk about the
Fed last year, but once again we've got
Rob Kaplan joining us. Rob, as you might
remember, is a he's been at times an
investment banker, uh a central banker,
a professor. Nowadays, he's vice
chairman at Goldman Sachs. Rob, welcome
to the show.
>> Great to be with you guys. The big news
that's been out there um is, you know,
this President Trump's tariffs or much
of President's Trump tariffs as an
illegal use of the president's trained
powers. And was that what you expected?
>> Uh we knew it was a significant
probability or possibility. I think the
administration uh was well prepared for
it also which is why uh you saw them
immediately or pretty close to
immediately move to extend new tariffs
with different authorizations.
Um, I think the market had a pretty
positive reaction on Friday and maybe
they took from that that there was room
to do a little bit more. So, they
changed it from 10 to 15% from Friday to
Saturday. But this new authorization,
whatever it is, section 122 that lasts
for 150 days, I think they were very
well prepared uh to put that in place
because they thought this might happen.
>> And how do you view the way the markets
reacted? So far, you said that it was a
pretty positive reaction on Friday. Um,
it seems like it's not been a huge move,
though.
>> Uh, there's a lot of questions left. Uh,
the average tariff rate with all this
said is going to be a little bit lower.
It has a little bit more effect on
certain geographic areas and certain
countries. Puts a little bit of question
on certain trade negotiations. And then
there's always the question, will there
be refunds? Juries, literally the jury's
out on that. They they need to look to a
lower court. And then what will the
mechanic be? So there'll be questions,
but I would guess uh the market will
settle itself down ultimately over all
these changes and get accustomed to
them. I'm particularly interested in the
reaction in the treasuries market
because the tariffs had a couple of
components to them and one of them was
the fiscal dimension. Tariff revenue was
coming in and that was playing a role in
the Trump administration's
um you know budget projections into the
future. It was going to be in the
trillions of dollars theoretically.
So you would think that taking them away
would imbalance the budget and maybe be
negative for the treasuries market thus
far. And obviously the market might make
make a different decision at some point,
but thus far treasuries have rallied,
yields have come down. Does that
surprise you at all?
>> The amount of money that we're talking
about at at issue is about hundred
billion dollars to be potentially
refunded.
Uh the the old tariffs under what it was
called have been basically almost fully
replaced by the new authorizations. So
the only really open question is is this
hundred billion will it be refunded and
how might it be refunded? So it's not
that much money that we're talking about
in the scheme of a
$30 trillion economy and uh you know
let's say 1 and 3/4 to2 trillion
deficit. At the same time, what the
market's also focused on is for a range
of reasons, we're expecting very strong
GDP growth in 2026. You've got
substantial tax incentives, tax on tips,
tax on overtime, accelerated
depreciation. Um, at Goldman Sachs, our
economists believe that could add as at
least 3/4 of 1% to GDP growth. uh the
shutdown from fourth quarter which you
not to slow GDP growth in the fourth
quarter some of that is going to
cause the first quarter to be a little
stronger than it was and so that'll help
growth and then you've got regulatory
reform which we think will help and
lastly as we've been talking about we're
in the middle of an AI data center power
infrastructure boom and so it's our
expectation at at at Goldman Sachs, our
constants believe GDP growth will be 2
and a half% plus. Um and then the
question is um with that growth and
whatever inflation is, will nominal
growth be high enough to maybe bend or
reduce the annual deficit from last
year? That's a possibility.
>> And so all those factors
uh weigh on the back end of the Treasury
curve. A little higher growth would make
Treasury rates a little stickier. Better
lower deficits will be helpful. And so
we've got that's a whole range of
factors, but it the net of it all is a
sticky tenyear, but it's been pretty
well behaved, I would say.
>> I want to dig into AI a little bit more.
I mean, we've seen the market, you know,
continuing to digest these big big
changes that are coming through from the
AI companies, the big hyperscalers and
the LLMs. And we've seen that
particularly in sectors like software,
which have sold off a lot as people fear
that, you know, software will be hurt by
AI. But people also don't seem to be
giving up on stocks overall. So, I mean,
how would you describe the way investors
are repositioning themselves right now?
The phase we're really in the middle of
right now is the infrastructure part he
not completely but heavily that's the
chips
power data centers all in service of
creating more compute that's very
stimulus to GDP growth the next phases
that are unfolding are the adoption
phases downstream i.e. Will companies,
all the rest of us, companies uh uh that
are users of AI and AI tools, will we
adopt those tools? And how widespread
will the adoption be? I think the
hyperscalers are betting the adoption is
going to be wide enough that we're going
to need even more compute than we're
currently creating. The infrastructure
part is stimulative and you might even
say it makes cost stickier because we
need more labor, we need more materials,
we need more power. But the adoption
part uh i.e. If businesses aggressively
adopt AI, which we believe they're going
to adopt AI at least some at some pretty
healthy pace,
that over the horizon actually uh is
going to make businesses more efficient,
is likely to improve margins. We think
it could add a a half a percentage point
uh to annual GDP growth through greater
productivity growth. And and if we get
that productivity growth, that aspect
should be disinflationary.
And we're going to see that disinflation
potentially unfold as we work through
26, 27, and 28 as this adoption phase
gets further along. And so that's that's
how the market sees it. Now, the last
point you talked about the impact on
financial assets. There are going to be
winners and they're going to be losers.
Uh and and what the market is trying to
wrestle with is if there is widespread
adoption and there are these new tools
being announced every few weeks from uh
Anthropic and other companies are they
going to disrupt some existing companies
incumbent companies software is been has
been a recent example but I think
there'll be more and what you're seeing
is what investors are doing and are
using this as an opportunity not to sell
risk assets but to reposition within
risk assets. You'll notice the overall
stock market has been although it's been
kind of flat this year but it's it's not
sold off but you see within the stock
market there's a bunch of sector
adjustments going on um depending on the
industry and I think you're going to see
more of that.
>> Yeah, it seems like investors are
fleeing to what you might think of as
defensive companies. There was a article
in the journal talking about halo
stocks. That stands for heavy assets,
low obsolescence, a coin uh a phrase
coined by Josh Brown. And what that
refers to are basically companies with
big traditional assets brands names like
McDonald's, Exon Mobile, Walmart, uh
Costco is reporting earnings this
upcoming week. Their stock is up 14%
this year. Do you think that that's
about being defensive? Do you think
that's about believing that those
companies will survive the AI
transition, you know, adopt those
technologies and become more efficient
in the future? Does that repositioning
surprise you to see more of those big
traditional Dow Jones industrial average
type names really being favored?
>> So, it makes sense and the market views
on this will will adapt and change. But
yeah, first of all, we're expecting
strong GDP growth. That helps a number
of these companies and as you said, uh
they're likely to also be adopters where
they can and become more efficient. Uh
and also the other the other thing that
investors are judging maybe these
companies have a good chance not to be
disrupted by AI whereas there are other
types of businesses that are more likely
to be disrupted or greater risk of being
disrupted. So yeah, markets are making
those judgments. But the thing about
markets uh is those those judgments get
uh uh refined and then re-refined and
then re-refined. And you'll see it uh
you'll see that that process continue uh
globally and in the United States as we
go through this year. Uh some of the
fears it turns the market may decide
ultimately were overblown about
disruption. maybe it underestimated the
risk in other sectors. And so that that
type of repositioning you just described
though makes sense and I think we'll see
more of it
>> with all of this disruption that we've
talked about coming from AI that's
changing the labor markets. It's
changing um you know the way companies
allocate capital. Is that prompting
companies to do more deals? Um, you
know, a year ago when we saw the shift
in tariff policy, it basically put big
deals on ice for a while. Um, are we
going to be frozen again or is there
just a lot that companies need to get
done on the dealm front?
>> We're seeing a uh a very high level of
merger activity. Uh, and we think that's
going to continue. So there there are a
few drivers. One of the drivers is um in
order to adapt
to AI uh you need to spend more money
you know to invest in these tools. Uh
and in the short run it it means you may
have to take it out of margin. Uh the
second part is your risk depending on
what industry you're in your risk of
being disrupted may go up. And so I I
think many companies that we're talking
to are feeling that uh they need more
size and scale and depth to be able to
compete in this environment and are
taking the opportunity to be much more
open-minded about doing merger activity.
The the other comment I'd make is um in
a period where disruption is higher, you
got to be a lot more careful about being
leveraged. Mhm.
>> And so for a lot of my business career,
a big portion of it, we tended to use
financial engineering uh as a big part
of generating return and companies did.
I think we're in a period now because
there's more uncertainty
uh and AI and disruption risk going to
create more uncertainty. Um I I think
you're going to be people be much more
careful about minim having more minimal
leverage not being as highly leveraged
because it reduces uh you know with you
have more operating risk you don't want
to have excessive financial risk and
that's why we're also seeing the larger
share of this merger activity is
corporate to corporate as opposed to uh
uh private equityled. Well, if I'm a
private equity firm in this environment,
I need to use leverage, right? Um, you
know, that's a big key part of my
business model. What are private equity
firms doing and how are they sort of
de-risking in this environment with with
the threat from AI?
>> So, they're assessing their portfolio
and many of them have ambitious plans to
monetize a number of their portfolio
companies. Um, and dependent on the
strategic value of each of those
companies, you know, determine how able
they are to do that. Uh, but the other
thing I think you'll see I think you'll
see deals that are done where uh if
you're going to be leveraged, it's going
to have to be in very specific
industries where you're more confident.
There's not as great a disruption risk.
And I think otherwise uh you may see
firms focus more on somewhat less
leverage in the capital structure in
order to uh take take to acknowledge the
the idea that you've got more disruption
risk and they want to have more uh a
little less financial risk given
operating risk is a little bit higher.
they'll find ways to manage through it.
But I think there's some, you know, um
strategic work being done at these firms
to rethink, you know, how they want to
handle their uh their existing
portfolios and and I I'm confident they
will work through that.
>> Well, that's certainly something that I
think the market's going to be looking
at very closely. the shares of a lot of
the big private equity private credit
managers have kind of taken a big hit
this year is I think people are
wondering about the future of that model
and then to your point about you know
will companies use leverage I think
there's also a lot of focus I know we've
been writing about this all the time
about the big tech companies and their
use of leverage the sort of you know the
the companies that that you would you
know haven't traditionally been tapping
the debt markets maybe seeing the need
to do so just because the investment
dollars are so enormous I think those
will be big market themes Let's separate
these two. So there's the big
hyperscalers
that are in their own right multi-t
trillion dollar companies highly
profitable
uh and are outstanding credits and are
not used to even needing debt. And yes,
a number of them are using debt to build
compute, power, data center, and build
out the infrastructure. The good news
about those companies, they're still
outstanding credits. Uh, and uh, and I
think they're well positioned to manage
this investment. And if it turns out in
hindsight, some of this investment is is
uh, is a little bit excessive, which I'm
not sure is we're going to conclude
that. But if that were to happen,
they've got trillions of dollars of
equity cap to cushion it. Then you have
uh down downstream a whole range of
other technology companies whether it's
in software or other industries
uh where their issue is a little bit
different. They're they're they're
vulnerable to being disrupted and
they're relooking at their capital
structures to make sure that they can
manage through that disruption and they
don't want to be overly highly
leveraged. And so that's where you're
seeing some of the stress. And the
market, as it usually does, it shoots
first and it asks questions later. And
so it makes judgments and sometimes it
overreacts. And then as the dust
settles, it gets a clearer picture. And
and I'd say in the last number of weeks,
you see uh you know what often happens,
the markets reacted. And I think as the
dust settles, uh, you'll get a more
nuanced view over the next several weeks
and months.
>> Well, we're going to take a quick break
and when we come back, we're going to
shift focus a little bit. We're going to
talk about mortgages and housing with
our guest Rob Kaplan of Goldman Sachs.
More on that in a moment.
So Rob, I'm going to ask you to put on
your central banker hat for a moment
because I want to ask you about
something interesting happening at the
Federal Reserve on the bank regulation
side. And that is a big look at rules
around banks, capital, and how it
applies to mortgages. Basically, in a
nutshell, it seems like what the Federal
Reserve has been talking about is making
it easier for banks to make mortgages.
Again, making it more costefficient for
them to do so to own the servicing
rights. that means to like actually
collect the money and all this is done
in the service of trying to make
mortgages cheaper. What do you think
about that as kind of a big policy goal?
What do you think about that from a
central bank point of view? Where is
this headed do you think?
>> So I mean big picture I I think um
there's a regulatory review and and
regulatory changes going on driven by
the Fed. Tough regulation is very
appropriate. Tough stress testing is
very appropriate. But I think the
questions being asked
in a country that's aging
that's highly leveraged debt to GDP over
100% we need more growth we need more
productivity growth doesn't it makes
sense to look at costbenefit analysis of
regulation you and this is going on in a
number of sectors but in the banking
sector to see that we can do more to
help generate growth in the economy and
so that's the overall thing that's going
on on on the mortgage front. Um the the
issue many banks have had is just the
mortgage business has been quieter
because there hasn't been as much
volume. And so, um, I think that I think
the administration and others are
looking at a whole range of action. It's
more of a mosaic, a puzzle that could
help improve the ability to get
permitting, improve ability of
homebuilders to assemble parcels, build
homes, uh, create more affordable homes,
and yes, uh, do more to bend the the
curve on mortgages. Now, uh, a part of
the answer on, um, on mortgages, if you
have a somewhat lower tenyear, all
things being equal, that's going to help
pull down the long end, uh, you know,
the mortgage curve. Uh and then you're
also seeing some actions they're they're
taking either to actually purchase
mortgages or and there's also some
discussions of uh alternative ideas for
how to make either uh mortgages portable
which they haven't haven't there's not a
solution but it's starting to be
discussed or other actions that might
again get more activity in that makes it
easier to build a home buy a home and
finance a home
>> by that You mean the bottom line is that
if we are trying to grease the wheels in
the economy for further growth, then you
think it's wise to kind of think about
banks and their role in lending and to
basically make it a little bit easier
for banks to lower some of their capital
requirements and kind of unleash them a
bit to sort of fuel that investment with
with relatively affordable lending. Is
that kind of the the main idea there? Do
you agree with that direction? So the
the idea starts with uh uh are there
actions that could be taken that would
free up without the banks having to
raise capital literally just free up
some of the capital they already have
that's being held to the side because of
current regulations. And I think there's
being what's being revisited is yeah,
are there are there actions that could
be taken that would allow the banks to
have more capital
that they could then use to lend and use
in their business which in turn would
help stimulate the economy.
>> How do you think investors would react
to a change in bank regulation or
deregulation of banks? seems like bank
regulation is pretty popular among
investors no matter what political party
you come from. Um people have been
burned in the past by by banks taking
undue risk.
>> Tough rules, tough stress testing. That
makes sense and I think we've been well
served in the aftermath of the of the uh
you know financial crisis. We've been
well served by that. However,
uh there may be a number of uh rules
that don't necessarily lead to more
safety and soundness that restrict banks
ability to do more uh in the economy.
And I think the trick is keep keep tough
standards but have more uh balance and
and um I think you can you can free the
banks to participate more and be more
constructive and do more business in the
economy and still manage the risk. And I
think some of the the market is already
uh um I think pricing in that some of
that is going to happen and you're
you're seeing that already and and I
think by and large the markets are uh
pretty constructively receiving this
right now. As long as it stays balanced
as it is, I think the markets are
receiving it in a in a constructive way.
>> Well, we're going to take a quick break
and when we come back, we've got one
more question for Rob Kaplan. It is a
Fed question, I will warn you, but this
was a much more straightforward one. So,
more on that in just a moment.
All right, welcome back. Uh, Rob, we
can't let you get out of here with
asking the usual sort of Fed question. I
know we've got a Fed decision coming up
in the not too distant future, but what
do you think? What should the next move
be? Should it be to hold, to cut? Uh,
what do you think should h what do you
think will happen? What do you think
should happen?
I think uh they should hold and I think
they will hold. So the the the reason
for that the Fed funds rate right now is
at three and a half three and
three/4ers.
Uh they cut three times in the fall. Uh
and the reason they did is they were
concerned about weakness in the labor
market. even though inflation was
running at say 2 and 3/4% they decided
to to buy some insurance for the labor
market by cutting three more times
though I would say they got the Fed
funds rate down to what I think is in
the neighborhood of nominally at neutral
right now the the Fed funds rate in my
judgment is a real rate of 3/4 to 1%
and then you add the inflation rate uh
for those who say the the nominal
neutral rate right now is 2 and 3/4 to
three. They're basically adding 2% to
that 3/4 to one. The problem is we
haven't had a 2% inflation rate in four
or five years. We're at about 2 and 3/4.
So the reason the Fed is struggling to
go further right now is they're right at
neutral. Uh and with inflation still at
two and three/4ers and economic growth
expected to be strong, they're they're
willing to cut, but they want to see
more improvement in inflation or
demonstrable improvement in inflation,
not forecast. They want to actually see
the improvement before they cut further.
They may well see it uh by middle to
late this year. And I think if they do,
they will take more action. But for the
March meeting, I think they're they're
very comfortable uh staying where they
are. And if and when Kevin Worsh is the
new Fed chair, do you expect policy to
change dramatically or do you think
it'll take some time or maybe we won't
even see big dramatic changes? What's
your expectation thus far? He's going to
argue
that the Fed should be more
forwardlooking and that AI, which we
talked about earlier, is ultimately over
the horizon is going to be
disinflationary.
Chinese manufacturing over capacity
is is ultimately disinflationary,
and he'll want them to anticipate that
improvement. Um, I think he would have a
hard time convincing this committee in
March to do that, but by the time he
gets in the seat, his first meeting
won't be till June. If you start to see
some demonstrable improvement in
inflation, I think he'll have more uh
luck uh convincing the group that they
should take some action. But it but the
tension will be he'd like them to
anticipate that improvement and also the
some on the committee are worried about
these mismatches in the labor market and
maybe you've got some more structural
weakness they'd like to help with but
the but the bulk of the committee right
now I think understands that but will
want to push back and say we'll move
when we see more improvements. So
that'll be the debate and I think that
debate and disagreement will be healthy
but that'll be the nature of the debate
you're going to hear.
>> So the question will be disinflation
versus anticipated disinflation. That's
right.
>> And that's what we should all be looking
out for.
>> Uh that's right. Uh Fed Fed has in the
last five years had a couple of periods
where it went out on the limb and made
predictions.
uh transitory was an example and I think
they got somewhat burned by it and so I
think they want to be more risk managers
right now not prognosticators.
>> I think that's it. Thank you so much for
joining us Rob. It's been great to have
you.
>> Great to be with both of you.
Hey, hey, hey.